---
tags: tech
title: Using local DNS caching
---

I've found a very easy way to use local DNS caching on the Mac: simply
setup Internet sharing from one device you don't use, to another you
don't use. Since I almost always get my Internet access through
wireless, I've setup my system to share my Fireware port to anyone
connected to my Ethernet port.

Although this sharing setup doesn't do any sharing, what it does do is
to cause OS/X to run a local DHCP server and a local DNS server. This
local DNS server takes its nameserver addresses from your current
Internet configuration (in my case, wireless), so everything is
automatically setup to cache DNS from the nameservers you're actually
using.

The only thing necessary to do is to change =/etc/resolv.conf= to point
at your new local nameserver. Using the Network Preferences Pane, find
out what your local Ethernet address is (to use my example; you'll have
to find the IP of the interface you're sharing from). Now edit
=/etc/resolv.conf= so it looks something like this:

#+begin_example
nameserver 192.168.2.1
#+end_example

In my case, my local Ethernet interface gets set to 192.168.2.1 when I'm
using sharing. You may need to setup a cron job (check out the utility
CronniX) in order for your resolv.conf to get overwritten each time with
this setting.

Now site back and enjoy the added speed of cached DNS! This is
especially helpful on connections that drop packets a lot, since I find
a great number of the "pauses" in my Internet usage all relate to lagged
out DNS lookups.
