---
title: Get Lisp running on OS X (easy version!)
tags: tech
---

A few days ago I posted instructions for getting a freeware based Common
Lisp installation running on your Mac. I have since discovered a better
alternative: just install
[[http://www.lispworks.com/downloads/][LispWorks Personal Edition]], a
free environment with a superb set of debugging and profiling tools.
Note that it does have the restriction that it will only run for five
hours at a time. Once you hit the four hour mark, it gives you a
warning, after which you should shutdown and restart the environment.
But really, if you're Lisping for more than four hours every day, that's
great news.

The other option is [[http://common-lisp.net/project/lispbox/][Lisp in a
Box]], which offers a completely self-contained freeware Lisp
environment that's ready to download and run on your Mac.

Since the Lisp in a Box site has gotten a little stale with regard to OS
X, I've created a new package based on Aquamacs, which I call Ready
Lisp. The advantage to this package is that it downloads as a single
Application bundle. You just drag-and-drop it into your =/Applications=
directory, double-click and go! You'll have all of the following tools
immediately at your disposal:

- Aquamacs 1.2a
- SBCL 1.0.10
- SLIME (CVS version 2007-09-27)

But the nicest part for those new to Emacs and Lisp is that everything
is pre-configured and setup for you. Once you double-click the packaged
application, you will find yourself at a REPL where you can start right
away:

#+begin_example
CL-USER> (format nil "Hello, world!")
"Hello, world!"
CL-USER>
#+end_example

The disk image is 44 Mb and can be
[[ftp://ftp.newartisans.com/pub/lisp/ReadyLisp.dmg][downloaded from my
Lisp repository over FTP]]. Also, please note that this package is for
Intel Macs only. If you need an easy Lisp to run on the PowerPC
architecture, I suggested you visit the
[[http://common-lisp.net/project/lispbox/][Lisp in a Box]] site and
download one of their packages based on OpenMCL.

Happy Lisping!
