---
tags: tech
title: A regular expression IDE for Emacs
---

I've started work on a new mode for Emacs, which intends to be something
like an "IDE" for regular expressions. There are similar tools out
there, such as [[http://code.google.com/p/reggy/][Reggy]] for OS X and
[[http://www.weitz.de/regex-coach/][The Regex Coach]] for Windows. But
the former doesn't show me subgroup matches, and the latter won't run on
OS X. Which made me wonder, wouldn't this be easy to do in Emacs? Three
hours later says yes.

#+begin_html
  <!--more-->
#+end_html

After downloading [[/downloads_files/regex-tool.el][regex-tool.el]], put
it somewhere where your Emacs can see it (typically
=/usr/local/share/emacs/site-lisp=), and then add this to your =.emacs=
file:

#+begin_example
(load "regex-tool" t)    ; load regex-tool if it's available
#+end_example

Then type =M-x load-file= and load it manually for your current session.
Once that is done, type =M-x regex-tool= to start the show. It will
create a new Emacs frame for you looking something like this:

The =*Regex*= section starts out blank, awaiting you to type in your
regular expression. The default syntax is Emacs; if you would prefer
=regex-tool= to use full Perl regular expressions, type the command
=M-x customize-group=, choose the group =regex-tool=, and then change
the backend to "perl" by clicking on the Value Menu. When configured to
use Perl, =regex-tool= will actually invoke a real Perl subprocess to
run your matches against, so you can use whatever syntax your installed
version of Perl accepts.

The matched parts of the sample string are highlighted in bold red, and
all the matching subgroups (including group 0, to show the whole match)
are indicated in the =*Groups*= buffer.

I'm sure there are many ways this little tool could be extended, so
please don't hesitate to send me a note with your suggestions. Or find
me in the #emacs IRC channel, on the server =irc.freenode.net=. I'm
=johnw= on there, and am online most evenings.
