---
tags: tech
title: A few remarkable Mac apps
---

The following is a list of some of the Mac applications I live in every
day. They are the precious few I couldn't live without, and that
contribute to my Joy of Mac each day. They are listed roughly in order
of affection.

#+begin_html
  <!--more-->
#+end_html

** LaunchBar
First on any list is
[[http://www.obdev.at/products/launchbar/index.html][LaunchBar]]. This
little utility single-handedly revolutionizes the way I use my Mac. It
is an application launcher, quick file finder, phone dialer, e-mail
starter, and more. If there's something I need my system to do,
LaunchBar will usually get me there in less than five keystrokes.

For freeware addicts, there is
[[http://quicksilver.blacktree.com][Quicksilver]] which is also
excellent. In fact, Quicksilver is somewhat better designed than
LaunchBar. I had switched to Quicksilver for six months, diving into all
its arcane and nifty features. However, as time wore on I gradually used
less and less of Quicksilver, until finally their daily feature sets
became equal. And LaunchBar can do that subset much faster, and more
reliably, than Quicksilver can. I got tired of resetting Quicksilver a
minimum of twice a day, dealing with random stalls, missing icon
previews, etc. LaunchBar is fast and almost never fails me.

** DEVONthink Pro
[[http://www.devon-technologies.com/products/devonthink/index.html][DEVONthink
Pro]] is an information database. You can drag almost any common type of
textual file into it, and it will index it and provide a built-in viewer
to view the contents. This makes it easy for me to keep all the PDFs and
web pages and text files together that relate to my recent researches.
But that's not where the power ends. This app is too deep to do justice
to it in one paragraph, but suffice it to say that in terms of my data,
I practically /live/ in DEVONthink Pro, using it to hold and search and
correlate almost everything I collect from various places around the
Web.

** RapidWeaver
[[http://www.realmacsoftware.com/rapidweaver/][RapidWeaver]] is what I
made this website with. It's easy to use, but very customizable. I need
a tool like this because I've found that unless something is nearly
effortless to do, I can't "keep up" with it. RapidWeaver is almost
entirely responsible for me actually writing new content for this
website.

** 1Password
The next runner up for sheer joy of use is
[[http://1Password.com/][1Password]], a password manager for most web
browsers on the Mac. It can also be used to conveniently store "secret
notes" which are viewed using the 1Password application. I'm currently
using 1Password to manage 145 web passwords and 137 secret notes. Even
though I have a different, random password for nearly every service I
use on the web, 1Password makes them all equally effortless. And better:
when I come to a form that needs my name, billing address and credit
card info, 1Password can fill in /all/ those fields with a single
keypress. The daily utility of this little app is amazing, considering I
first thought it would be superfluous next to Apple's own Keychain
application.

** ChronoSync
I'm a backup maniac. At any given time, I like to have about five
different backups of my data, here, there and everywhere.
[[http://www.econtechnologies.com/site/Pages/ChronoSync/chrono_overview.html][ChronoSync]]
has the best interface for backing my data that I've found so far. It's
still not my ideal, but it's fairly easy to use, keeps generational
archives of replaced backup files, and has a good status indicator. It's
main downside is that it's unusably slow when using network volumes, but
I'm hoping they get that fixed someday.

** Minuteur
[[http://perso.orange.fr/philippe.galmel/index_mac.html][Minuteur]]
would win every award I have for just plain cuteness and intelligence of
interface on a small scale. It's just an egg timer, but I use it any
time I need an upcoming alarm or countdown timer. You just run the app,
type in some numbers, and it starts. Almost all its functionality can be
driven by the space bar, return key and the number keys, in very
intelligently thought-out ways. After using it for several months, I
found it well worth the donation the author asks for.

** QuicKeys
[[http://www.cesoft.com/products/quickeys.html][QuicKeys]] is one of the
more expensive utilities I use, but given that I use it literally
thousands of times a day, I can't complain. The whole point of money is
to translate your efforts into efforts made on your behalf; by that
metric, QuicKeys is worth every penny of its hefty price tag. At the
moment I have nearly fifty macros active on my system, customizing all
kinds of applications that otherwise would require lengthy, repetitive
mousing and keyboarding.

** Little Snitch
I'm a bit of a security nut, which is why I love
[[http://www.obdev.at/products/littlesnitch/index.html][Little Snitch]],
a network monitoring app by the same people who created LaunchBar.
Whenever an application tries to talk to the Internet for the first
time, Little Snitch gives me the opportunity of allowing or denying the
connection. It has been /extremely/ helpful in learning what goes in
inside my machine when I connect to the Net. You'd be surprised
sometimes. For educational value alone it's worth running it during its
three hour trial period.

** Path Finder
[[http://www.cocoatech.com/][Path Finder]] is a Finder replacement for
the Mac that is far nicer to use than what the Mac comes with. I find
the default Finder to be pretty unusable (Update: not true anymore with
Leopard), which had forced me to do all my file manipulation in the
Terminal, or Emacs. But Path Finder brought me back to a world of
efficient mousing and easy to read graphical displays.

** VMware Fusion
[[http://www.vmware.com/products/fusion/][VMware Fusion]] is a virtual
machine emulator for the Mac. It lets you rather other Intel-based
operating systems, like Windows XP, Linux, BSD, Solaris -- even OS X
itself if you do enough searching on the Web to figure it out. I /love/
virtualization technology, and I use this app every day. Sometimes I
have multiple virtual machines running as pseudo-servers so that I can
test out changes in client/server type code.

** Merlin
[[#merlin][Merlin]] is a project manager in the style of Microsoft
Project. Until I found Merlin, I never had a good way of making
estimates for clients, keeping on task with those estimates, or of
providing regular updates of the current projected date based on work
done so far. Merlin, despite its initial complexity, made it truly
enjoyable to manage all of this detail in a way that was easy to
communicate to my clients.
