---
title: A Ledger success story
tags: tech
---

Over the Christmas break I went on Bahá'í pilgrimage to the holy sites
in Haifa, Israel. It was a nine day stay in Haifa, with three extra days
spent traveling and resting in Tel Aviv.

#+begin_html
  <!--more-->
#+end_html

Three of us went: my wife and I, and my mother-in-law. We wanted to
avoid the confusion of who pays for what, so we just pooled all our
money together, assigned me as the accountant, and after the trip I was
supposed to figure out exactly how much each person owed, less what they
originally put into the pot. These finances were further complicated by
having to deal with three currencies (USD, Euros, and New Israeli
Shekels), and the use of both cash in two currencies, Traveler's Checks
in US dollars, and my MasterCard.

This is just such a case where my double-entry accounting tool,
[[http://www.newartisans.com/software/ledger.html][Ledger]], ought to
shine. Imagine keeping track of all those details in Quicken -- which
doesn't even support multiple currencies in a "cash" type account! (At
least, it didn't the last time I used Quicken).

Anyway, not only did my general ledger happily balance to zero at the
end (and, because of the double-entry book-keeping, found many errors in
my paper register), but I knew exactly how much to pay each person back,
and even how much money I lost due to the conversion from dollars to
shekels and back again. All this accounting work was done today using
the Common Lisp version of Ledger (CL-Ledger), and took just under 3
hours to complete with 65 entries total and 172 transactions.
