---
title: Response to PG's "How to Do Philosophy"
tags: tech
---

Back in late 2007, Paul Graham put up an essay titled "How to Do
Philosophy", in which Mr. Graham hoped to elucidate where Philosophy
went wrong and why the field, as now practiced, must be renovated to
remain useful. In fact, he goes so far as to suggest that much of
philosophy has no benefit whatsoever:

#+begin_quote
The proof of how useless some of their answers turned out to be is how
little effect they have. No one after reading Aristotle's Metaphysics
does anything differently as a result.

#+end_quote

If I may, as a student of philosophy, I would like to offer my response
to this argument, whose tenets have been repeated many times throughout
Philosophy's history.

#+begin_html
  <!--more-->
#+end_html

** The spirit of philosophy
As far back as Plato's Republic (and most likely long before then) there
have been debates on the merit of philosophy. In Plato's book it is
between Socrates and Glaucon, who fears that men may waste their time in
fruitless contemplation:

#+begin_quote
Socrates: I am amused, I said, at your [Glaucon's] fear of the world,
which makes you guard against the appearance of insisting upon useless
studies; and I quite admit the difficulty of believing that in every man
there is an eye of the soul which, when by other pursuits lost and
dimmed, is by these purified and re-illumined; and is more precious far
than ten thousand bodily eyes, for by it alone is truth seen....

#+end_quote

Earlier Socrates had said something similar, and in briefer terms:

#+begin_quote
Socrates: Then must not a further admission be made?

Glaucon: What admission?

Socrates: That the knowledge at which geometry aims is knowledge of the
eternal, and not of aught perishing and transient.

Glaucon: That, he replied, may be readily allowed, and is true.

Socrates: Then, my noble friend, geometry will draw the soul towards
truth, and create the spirit of philosophy, and raise up that which is
now unhappily allowed to fall down.

#+end_quote

This "spirit of philosophy" is held by Socrates over and over again to
be precious beyond compare: a light to illumine every aspect of life. If
a lantern is something you can design, hold and weigh, yet this light is
its intangible counterpart, granting the lamp its purpose. It is the
"why" to the lantern's "what" and "how". It can neither be designed, nor
held, nor weighed, but must be enkindled. And only then does the lamp
come aglow...

** The harp on practicality
I understand the need for practical results in a material world, but
results are meaningless deprived of context. If we boil things down to
their material essence, then what we do we do for survival: develop
resources to protect and prolong life. But is surviving enough? Don't
people also seek meaning from what they do? Certainly I don't enjoy
programming merely to make a paycheck; I have to feel something /more/
to keep me motivated year after year.

The harp on practicality levied against philosophy overstresses the
"what" against the "why". Mr. Graham debates how to make philosophy
useful again, but I think he has lost the point of it: useful in terms
of what? Does usefulness have a "why"? Who is to define the best "use"
of anything, so that usefulness may be measured? Thus, there is a
conundrum at this center of his argument: How can any man judge
philosophy who has not discovered what it aims to impart?

Anyone can understand the concept of practicality. Even children connect
the ideas of work and output. It's why we hate cleaning our room,
because it takes so much work yet we gain so little from it. But what is
pratical is not the same as what is essential. Happiness, most of us
know, is not found in more money, more power, or by more efficient
processes. There is only one outcome in this life which is inevitable,
and curiously neither industry nor indolence has any effect on its
timing or nature. But whereas the practical man fears death as the end
of opportunity, perhaps the philosopher sees it differently:

#+begin_quote
Socrates: The philosopher desires death -- which the wicked world will
insinuate that he also deserves: and perhaps he does, but not in any
sense which they are capable of understanding. Enough of them: the real
question is, What is the nature of that death which he desires? Death is
the separation of soul and body -- and the philosopher desires such a
separation. He would like to be freed from the dominion of bodily
pleasures and of the senses, which are always perturbing his mental
vision. He wants to get rid of eyes and ears, and with the light of the
mind only to behold the light of truth....

#+end_quote

So the question is raised: Is there more than just this world? I don't
necessarily mean physical death, either. For there is a world of purely
material pursuits and achievement -- a world we share in common with
animals -- and there is a world of inspiration, abstraction, and
fantasy, which only men participate in. The "practical man" knows well
the value of practical things and he is an expert at perfecting the
animal life; but it takes more than a well-fed stomach to bring true
content. If not so, then cows should be our kings.

If a philosopher is anything, I say he is someone who forgoes all else
to discover and adventure in /that/ world, and to learn what effect
immaterial consequences should have on our material life, if all is to
be as it ought.

** The bane of method
Not everyone who reads Plato, of course, comes away with mystical
opinions. Just as there are those who eschew philosophy entirely and
ignore its delights, so there are some who accept it but half-way. They
see that philosophy prescribes a method and they fall in love with that
method, dedicating the whole of their pursuit to refining it. Yes, Plato
did stress the necessity of dialectic, but his stress had a purpose in
mind. Not a material or pratical goal -- hardly even a "useful" one in
immediate terms -- but a personal and soulful one.

Philosophy is ever so much more than method. In fact, the love of method
has resulted in a few branches of philosophy which are hardly philosophy
at all, but the art of analysis. What Plato used his method for was to
approach noesis: to know the "real real", to have a direct apprehension
of reality freed from mortal conceptions; to "remember" the soul's birth
and origin; to return our perception of the world to an original, direct
perception of Truth itself. Through this experience of true perception
our breasts and minds would dilate, and every pursuit will become
infused with the vibrating principle of Life.

** Missing the point
This is why, when I read essays like Mr. Graham's, I find myself
thinking that his own success and momentum have caused him to miss the
point. Philosophy is not meant to be practical. It is not meant to have
a use. It does not exist to make us more productive girls and boys. It
is a diet of words to feed our soul by way of stimulating our mind. It
is not a roast-beef sandwich, but more the substance of an ethereal
longing.

Some will ask, what is this thing that is words and nothing more? To
them I reply: Then what is poetry? There are human endeavors which are
little more than words or pigments on paper, that come to life only
through the eye of an appreciate heart and mind. Does a man read
Shakespeare and ask what profit he has gained? If he does then he cannot
see the point. What he gains is immaterial -- literally and figuratively
-- but may in the long run be immensely valuable. It depends on what he
saw, how well he saw, and the breadth of his vision.

It is no different with Philosophy. Consider it an artform, or a method
of tuning the soul through delicate adjustments of the mind. When one
tunes a violin there is no melody played; that comes after. The fruit of
philosphy is the philosopher's life itself. It is how it changes the man
that matters, not the changes he can prove to you from day to day.

So if you are accustomed to reading balance sheets and preparing
quarterly projections, perhaps you are ill-equipped to judge philosophy.
But if you measure the smile of a happy engineer against the despair of
an endless, daily grind, maybe then you will have found the weight of
philosophy's fruit.
